---
title:2. Ischemic Colitis
date: "2023-02-02"
enableToc: false
---

> [!info] 
> 
> 🌱來自: [[abdominal pain]]

# 2. Ischemic Colitis

##### Textbook Presentation

Ischemic colitis typically presents with left-sided abdominal pain. Patients frequently have bloody or maroon stools or diarrhea. Profuse bleeding is unusual.

##### Disease Highlights

**A.**  The most common form of intestinal ischemia

**B.**  Usually due to nonocclusive decrease in colonic perfusion

**C.**  Distribution

**1.**  Typically involves the watershed areas of the colon, most commonly the splenic flexure, descending colon, and rectosigmoid junction.

**2.**  Right colonic involvement occurs occasionally.

**3.**  Rectal involvement is rare and suggests other diseases.

**D.**  Precipitating events may include hypotension, myocardial infarction, sepsis, heart failure, or cardiac or aortic surgery but is usually not identified.

**E.**  Uncommon causes include

**1.**  Vasculitis

**2.**  Hypercoagulable states

**3.**  Vasoconstrictors

**4.**  Cocaine

**5.**  Vascular surgery

**6.**  Drugs (eg, alosetron)

**7.**  Long-distance running or bicycling (presumably due to shunting and hypoperfusion)

##### Evidence-Based Diagnosis

**A.**  Abdominal pain (not usually severe) is reported by 68–84% of patients.

**B.**  Hematochezia is a helpful diagnostic clue when present but not when absent. Sensitivity, 46%; specificity, 90.9%; LR\+, 5.1; LR−, 0.6

**C.**  Diarrhea is seen in approximately 40% of patients.

**D.**  Abdominal tenderness is common (81%), but rebound tenderness is rare (15%).

**E.**  Risk factors that increase the likelihood of ischemic colitis include

**1.**  Age > 60 years

**2.**  Hemodialysis

**3.**  Cardiovascular disease

**4.**  Hypertension

**5.**  Diabetes mellitus

**6.**  Hypoalbuminemia

**7.**  Medications that induce constipation

**F.**  Features that distinguish acute mesenteric ischemia (small bowel) from ischemic colitis are summarized in Table 3-13.

**Table 3-13.** Features that distinguish ischemic colitis from acute mesenteric ischemia.



**G.**  Colonoscopy (without preparation) is the preferred test to evaluate ischemic colitis.

**H.**  Ultrasound may show segmental circumferential thickening of a long segment (> 10 cm) of the splenic flexure or sigmoid with sudden transition from abnormal to normal areas. Color flow is absent or greatly diminished in 80% of cases, helping distinguish this from IBD in which flow is increased.

**I.**  CT scan may demonstrate segmental circumferential wall thickening (which is nonspecific) or be normal.

**J.**  Vascular studies are usually normal and not indicated except in the unusual case of isolated right-sided ischemic colitis.

##### Treatment

**A.**  Therapy is primarily supportive, with bowel rest, IV hydration, and broad-spectrum antibiotics.

**B.**  Colonic infarction occurs in a small percentage of patients (15–20%) and requires segmental resection.

**C.**  Indications for surgery include peritonitis, sepsis, free air on plain radiographs, clinical deterioration (persistent fever, increasing leukocytosis, lactic acidosis), or strictures.

### CASE RESOLUTION




The abdominal CT scan reveals marked dilatation proximal to a transition point in the sigmoid colon with collapse distally. There is a suggestion of a mass at this location. Mr. J underwent surgical exploration, which confirmed an obstructing colonic mass. The mass was resected and a colostomy created. Pathologic evaluation revealed adenocarcinoma of the colon.





### CHIEF COMPLAINT


**PATIENT**

Mr. L is a 65-year-old man who arrives in the emergency department complaining of 1 hour of excruciating constant diffuse periumbilical abdominal pain radiating to his left flank. He has never had pain like this before. He has suffered 1 episode of vomiting and feels light headed. The emesis was yellow. He has moved his bowels once this morning and continues to pass flatus. There is no change in his bowel habits, melena, or hematochezia. Nothing seems to make the pain better or worse. He was without any pain until this morning. His past medical history is remarkable for hypertension and tobacco use and appendectomy at age 12. On physical exam, he is diaphoretic and in obvious acute distress. Vital signs are BP, 110/65 mm Hg; pulse, 90 bpm; temperature, 37.0°C; RR, 20 breaths per minute. HEENT, cardiac, and pulmonary exams are all within normal limits. Abdominal exam reveals moderate diffuse tenderness, without rebound or guarding. Bowel sounds are present and hypoactive. Stool is guaiac negative.



**At this point, what is the leading hypothesis, what are the active alternatives, and is there a must not miss diagnosis? Given this differential diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?**


### RANKING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Mr. L has severe, diffuse, and acute abdominal pain. The first pivotal point evaluates the location of the pain. Mr. L’s pain is diffuse, which limits the differential diagnosis. Common causes of diffuse mid abdominal pain include IBS; IBD; SBO or LBO; acute ischemia; AAA; diabetic ketoacidosis; gastroenteritis; and, given the radiation of pain to his back, pancreatitis, and nephrolithiasis (Figure 3-1). Although this is an extensive differential, it can be focused further. Several of these diagnoses are very unlikely and need not be considered further. Given the lack of diarrhea and the severity of pain, gastroenteritis is very unlikely. His continued bowel movements and flatus make bowel obstruction unlikely (although this can be seen early in obstruction.) The lack of a history of diabetes would make diabetic ketoacidosis unlikely, unless this was the initial presentation; a simple blood sugar could help exclude this diagnosis. The second pivotal point which can serve to narrow the differential diagnosis is the time course of the pain, which is hyperacute. Of the remaining hypotheses, AAA, bowel ischemia, pancreatitis, and nephrolithiasis can all present acutely, whereas this would be very unlikely presentation of IBD or IBS. The radiation to the left flank increases the likelihood of AAA, nephrolithiasis, and pancreatitis. Clearly, AAA is a must not miss diagnosis. Other pivotal findings that can help narrow the differential diagnosis include peritoneal findings on exam, unexplained hypotension and abdominal distention. Table 3-14 lists the differential diagnoses for Mr. L.

**Table 3-14.** Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. L.





Exploring each one of the hypotheses, Mr. L has no history of kidney stones or hematuria. He does not drink alcohol. He has no history of atrial fibrillation, valvular heart disease, or hypercoagulable states. On reexamination, orthostatic maneuvers reveal profound orthostatic hypotension. Supine BP and pulse were 110/65 mm Hg and 90 bpm. Upon standing his BP falls to 65/40 mm Hg and a pulse of 140 bpm. He remains afebrile. Again, you find that he lacks rebound or guarding and has moderate flank and back tenderness to percussion. His abdominal aorta cannot be palpated due to his abdominal girth. Lower extremity pulses are intact. Plain abdominal radiographs do not demonstrate free air.



**Is the clinical information sufficient to make a diagnosis? If not, what other information do you need?**


The most dramatic and important pivotal physical finding is the presence of profound orthostatic hypotension. It is critical to appreciate that his hypotension is clearly out of proportion to dehydration since he has only vomited once and his decreased oral intake only began 1 hour ago. As noted above *unexplained* hypotension is a pivotal finding that must be explained. The lack of dehydration suggests that the orthostatic hypotension is due to either intra-abdominal hemorrhage or sepsis (Table 3-3). He has no fever or chills to suggest sepsis, but this is still possible. A serious consideration is therefore massive intra-abdominal hemorrhage, either within the gastrointestinal tract or intraperitoneal. Massive gastrointestinal hemorrhage always exits the bowel quickly resulting in obvious clinical findings, such as hematemesis, melena, or hematochezia, and is rarely subtle. Therefore, you are more concerned about intraperitoneal hemorrhage. Causes of massive intraperitoneal hemorrhage include AAA rupture, splenic rupture, or rupture of an ectopic pregnancy. The patient’s history is most suggestive of AAA rupture. You call for a stat vascular surgery consult.



Orthostatic hypotension is always important. It significantly influences the differential diagnosis and the diagnostic and management decisions, and it may be marked despite a *normal supine* BP and pulse.

